>> I AM A CANDIDATE FOR
PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES
OF AMERICA.
>> Sreenivasan: JEB BUSH KICKS
OFF HIS PRESIDENTIAL RUN...
>> I'M NOT RUNNING FOR OBAMA'S
THIRD TERM OR MY HUSBAND'S THIRD
TERM.
>> Sreenivasan: ...WHILE HILLARY
CLINTON FIGHTS TO SEPARATE
HERSELF FROM HER PREDECESSORS.
ALL THAT AND MORE ON THIS WEEK'S
POLITICS MONDAY.
GOOD EVENING, I'M HARI
SREENIVASAN.
GWEN IFILL AND JUDY WOODRUFF ARE
AWAY.
ALSO AHEAD THIS MONDAY:
>> Sreenivasan: PLUS, THE GREEK
DEBT CRISIS COMES TO A HEAD,
AFTER TALKS BETWEEN THE
GOVERNMENT AND ITS CREDITORS
COLLAPSE.
OPENING THE DOORS TO CUBA,
AMERICANS FLOCK TO EXPERIENCE
THE LONG-CLOSED ISLAND'S EXOTIC
PROMISES, BUT ECONOMIC BARRIERS
STILL REMAIN.
>> THE COUNTRY IS 90 MILES SOUTH
OF FLORIDA, IT'S SO CLOSE AND
IT'S INTERESTING BECAUSE
NOBODY'S BEEN HERE.
IT'S BEEN A, LET'S CALL IT A
FORBIDDEN FRUIT OR AN OFF-LIMITS
ISLAND.
>> Sreenivasan: THOSE ARE SOME
OF THE STORIES WE'RE COVERING ON
TONIGHT'S PBS NEWSHOUR.
>> Sreenivasan: THE REPUBLICAN
PRESIDENTIAL RING HAS ITS
BIGGEST HAT YET.
JEB BUSH OFFICIALLY TOSSED HIS
IN TODAY, JOINING 10 OTHER
DECLARED CANDIDATES.
IN A MIAMI SPEECH, THE FORMER
GOVERNOR OF FLORIDA PROMISED TO
AID "THE MOST VULNERABLE" IN
SOCIETY.
WE'LL HAVE A FULL REPORT, AFTER
THE NEWS SUMMARY.
THERE WERE TWO, HIGH-PROFILE
DEPARTURES TODAY, AS WELL.
THE HEAD OF THE N.A.A.C.P.'S
LOCAL CHAPTER IN SPOKANE,
WASHINGTON STEPPED DOWN, AMID A
STORM OVER HER RACIAL IDENTITY.
RACHEL DOLEZAL'S PARENTS SAY
SHE'S POSED AS BLACK FOR YEARS,
WHEN SHE'S ACTUALLY WHITE.
IN AN ONLINE STATEMENT TODAY,
SHE SAID IT'S BEST SHE RESIGN
BECAUSE:
"THE MOVEMENT IS LARGER THAN A
MOMENT IN TIME OR A SINGLE
PERSON'S STORY..."
AND IN MINNESOTA, THE ARCHBISHOP
OF ST. PAUL AND MINNEAPOLIS,
JOHN NIENSTEDT, RESIGNED, ALONG
WITH AN AUXILIARY BISHOP.
THEY ACTED 10 DAYS AFTER THE
STATE FILED CRIMINAL CHARGES
THAT THE CHURCH HAD FAILED TO
PROTECT CHILDREN FROM SEXUAL
ABUSE BY A PRIEST.
>> A CHANGE IN LEADERSHIP OFFERS
US AN OPPORTUNITY FOR GREATER
HEALING AND THE ABILITY TO MOVE
FORWARD.
WE WILL CONTINUE TO DO ALL THAT
WE CAN TO CREATE SAFE
ENVIRONMENTS FOR ALL CHILDREN.
AND TO BRING JUST RESOLUTION TO
THE CLAIMS AGAINST THE
ARCHDIOCESE.
>> Sreenivasan: THE PROSECUTOR
WHO BROUGHT THE CRIMINAL CHARGES
WELCOMED THE RESIGNATIONS, BUT
SAID THE CASE WILL CONTINUE.
THE PRESIDENT OF SUDAN, OMAR
HASSAN AL-BASHIR, MANAGED TO
DODGE ARREST TODAY ON WAR CRIMES
CHARGES.
SUPPORTERS CHEERED BASHIR'S
ARRIVAL BACK IN KHARTOUM, THE
SUDANESE CAPITAL.
HE'D BEEN AT AN AFRICAN UNION
SUMMIT IN SOUTH AFRICA WHEN A
COURT THERE ORDERED HIM NOT TO
LEAVE.
HE LEFT ANYWAY, AND A SOUTH
AFRICAN JUDGE TODAY SHARPLY
CRITICIZED AUTHORITIES FOR
LETTING HIM GET AWAY.
>> THE CONDUCT OF THE
RESPONDENT, TO THE EXTENT THAT
THEY HAVE FAILED TO TAKE STEPS
TO ARREST AND/OR DETAIN THE
PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF
SUDAN OMAR HASSAN ALMAT AL
BASHIR, PRESIDENT BASHIR, IS
INCONSISTENT WITH THE
CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC OF
SOUTH AFRICA 1996 AND INVALID.
>> Sreenivasan: PRESIDENT BASHIR
IS WANTED BY THE INTERNATIONAL
CRIMINAL COURT ON CHARGES OF
GENOCIDE IN SUDAN'S DARFUR
REGION.
THE U.S. MILITARY WORKED TODAY
TO CONFIRM THAT A WEEKEND AIR
STRIKE IN LIBYA KILLED THE
ALGERIAN MILITANT MOKHTAR
BELMOKHTAR.
HE'S LINKED TO AL-QAEDA, AND
ACCUSED OF LEADING A 2013 ATTACK
ON AN ALGERIAN GAS PLANT.
35 HOSTAGES WERE KILLED THERE,
INCLUDING THREE AMERICANS.
PENTAGON OFFICIALS SAY INITIAL
ASSESSMENTS INDICATE HE WAS
KILLED IN THE LIBYA RAID.
IN SYRIA, KURDISH FIGHTERS,
BACKED BY U.S. AIR STRIKES,
SEIZED MOST OF A KEY TOWN NEAR
RAQQA, THE ISLAMIC STATE'S DE
FACTO CAPITAL.
AS THEY DID, DESPERATE REFUGEES
CROWDED A BORDER CROSSING INTO
TURKEY.
ALEX THOMSON OF INDEPENDENT
TELEVISION NEWS FILED THIS
REPORT.
>> TERRIFIED, EXHAUSTED, AT
LEAST 10,000 HAVE NOW FORCED
THEIR WAY INTO TURKEY, ALL
EVENT LYUL -- EVENTUALLY
ALLOWED IN THE PAST TWO DAYS.
ANYTHING IS BETTER THAN THE
FIGHTING BACK HOME.
>> TANKS AND WARPLANES ARE
BOMBING PEOPLE IN SYRIA.
THESE PEOPLE HAD TO LEAVE
THEIR HOMES AND COME TO TUR
CAN BECAUSE YOU CAN'T EVEN
FIND A LOCAL BREAD THERE
PEOPLE ARE GETTING KILLED,
INCLUDING WOMEN AND
CHILDREN.
IT'S A BIG MESS IN THERE.
>> EDAST P 48 HOURS A PUBLIC
RELATIONS DISASTER FOR
TURKEY.
ANCHORA TROOPS THIS SIDE OF
THE SEALED FRONTIER REFUSING
TO LET IN THESE DESPERATE
SYRIANS.
FIGHTERS ALSO TRYING TO
DISPERSE THESE TIRED AND
FRIGHTENED PEOPLE.
BEING ON AND BEING SEEN TO
BE ON THE SAME SIDE AS IS
FIGHTERS, EVEN FOR A FEW
HOURS, IS AN IMAGE NO
COUNTRY WANTS TO PRESENT TO
THE WORLD.
HERE'S WHAT THE PEOPLE ARE
FLEEING, SO CLOSE YOU CAN
SEE IT FROM THE TURKISH
BORDER, SMOKE AND FLAMES
AROUND THE TOWN.
KURDISH MILLISH YAS ON THE
GROUND, THE U.S. BY AIR,
BOTH PUSHING BACK IS
FIGHTERS, LATE THIS
AFTERNOON IT WAS
REPORTED-- REPORTED THAT THE
KURDS HAD TAKEN THE BORDER
CROSSING HERE.
TURKEY THOUGH IS
INCREASINGLY CONCERNED OF
SPREADING KURDISH MILITARY
SUCCESSES IN THE AGAINST IS.
THE MORE THE KURDS DISPLACE
THEM, THE MORE WORRIED
TURKEY GETS ABOUT THEIR OWN
INTERNAL ISSUE WITH KURDS.
FOR NOW THOUGH, THEY JUST
KEEP COMING.
MORE THAN 17,000 IN THE PAST
NIGHT.
THE EXHAUSTED, THE TERRIFIED,
THE INNOCENT, AS EVER THE
MOST POWERLESS AND THE MOST
BATTERED BY THE VIOLENCE.
>> Sreenivasan: THE KURDISH
OFFENSIVE AIMS TO LINK KURDISH-
CONTROLLED AREAS IN NORTHERN
SYRIA, AND TO CUT A KEY SUPPLY
LINE FOR ISLAMIC STATE FORCES.
U.N.-BROKERED PEACE TALKS ON
YEMEN GOT OFF TO A STUMBLING
START TODAY IN GENEVA.
OFFICIALS OF THE GOVERNMENT-IN-
EXILE SHOWED UP, BUT THE SHIITE
REBEL DELEGATION NEVER GOT
THERE.
THEY BLAMED THE U.N. FOR FAILING
TO SECURE THEIR SAFE PASSAGE.
U.N. SECRETARY-GENERAL BAN KI-
MOON DID MAKE IT, AND MET WITH
YEMENI GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS.
HE CALLED FOR A TWO-WEEK TRUCE
TO COINCIDE WITH THE START OF
THE MUSLIM HOLY MONTH OF
RAMADAN.
>> TODAY, YEMEN'S VERY EXISTENCE
HANGS IN THE BALANCE.
WHILE PARTIES BICKER, YEMEN
BURNS.
THE PARTIES HAVE A
RESPONSIBILITY TO END THE
FIGHTING, AND BEGIN A REAL
PROCESS OF PEACE AND
RECONCILIATION.
>> Sreenivasan: THE WORLD HEALTH
ORGANIZATION ESTIMATES MORE THAN
2,600 PEOPLE HAVE DIED IN THE
FIGHTING IN YEMEN SINCE MARCH.
HALF WERE CIVILIANS.
THE DOCUMENT THAT INSPIRED THE
U.S. CONSTITUTION TURNED 800
YEARS OLD TODAY.
MAGNA CARTA IS CONSIDERED THE
FOUNDING DOCUMENT OF ENGLISH LAW
AND CIVIL LIBERTIES, MAKING THE
KING SUBJECT TO THE LAW, RATHER
THAN ABOVE IT.
TODAY, QUEEN ELIZABETH, BRITISH
PRIME MINISTER DAVID CAMERON AND
OTHER DIGNITARIES GATHERED AT
RUNNYMEADE, OUTSIDE LONDON,
WHERE KING JOHN SIGNED THE
CHARTER ON JUNE 15, 1215.
ONLY FOUR ORIGINAL COPIES OF
MAGNA CARTA STILL EXIST.
AND ON WALL STREET TODAY, THE
FAILURE OF THE GREEK BAILOUT
TALKS WEIGHED ON STOCKS.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
LOST 107 POINTS TO SLIP BACK
UNDER 17,800.
THE NASDAQ FELL 21 POINTS, AND
THE S&P 500 WAS DOWN NINE.
STILL TO COME ON THE NEWSHOUR:
FROJEB'M S ANNOUNCEMENT TO
HILLARY'S RALLY, BREAKING DOWN
THIS WEEK IN POLITICS.
GREECE HANGS ON THE BRINK OF
EMERGENCY AS TALKS FAIL.
NEW POSSIBILITIES, AND ECONOMIC
CHALLENGES, AS AMERICANS COME TO
CUBA.
ONE SCHOOL'S STRUGGLE TO BEAT
THE ODDS.
AND, FROM A CHILD OF PRIVILEGE
TO INFAMOUS DEFECTOR, THE
REMARKABLE LIFE OF STALIN'S
DAUGHTER.
>> Sreenivasan: JEB BUSH FIRST
ENTERED THE PRESIDENTIAL
CONVERSATION IN THE LATE '90s.
BUT TODAY, FOR THE FIRST TIME,
HE ENTERED THE PRESIDENTIAL RACE
ITSELF, ANNOUNCING HIS CANDIDACY
AT AN EVENT IN MIAMI.
OUR POLITICAL DIRECTOR LISA
DESJARDINS REPORTS.
>> THE NEXT PRESIDENT OF THE
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,
JEB BUSH.
>> IN A PACKED MIAMI SDID
COLLEGE WITH AN EXECUTIVE
RESUME AND POWER NAME, JEB
BUSH BEGAN BLUNTLY SAYING
THE COUNTRY IS ON A VERY BAD
COURSE.
>> THE QUESTION FOR ME IS,
WHAT AM I GOING TO DO ABOUT
IT.
AND I'VE DECIDED I'M A
CANDIDATE FOR PRESIDENT OF
THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.
>> Reporter: A MODERATE TO
SOME REPUBLICANS, A
CONSERVATIVE TO OTHERS,
BUSH'S LARGEST TARGET WAS
THE OTHER PARTY, AND
NATIONAL SECURITY.
>> WITH THEIR PHONE IT IN
FOREIGN POLICIES, THE OBAMA
CLINTON KERRY TEAM IS
LEAVING A LEGACY OF CRISES
UNCONTAINED.
VIOLENCE UNOPPOSED, ENEMIES
UNNAMED, FRIENDS UNDEFENDED
AND ALLIANCES UNRAVELING.
>> BUSH LAUNCHES WITH MIXED
POLITICAL BLESSINGS.
THE SON AND BROTHER OF
PRESIDENTS AND A TWO-TERM
HIGH PROFILE GOVERNOR IN HIS
OWN RIGHT, LESLEY SANCHEZ IS
A STRATEGIST WHO WORKED FOR
GEORGE W. BUSH.
>> HE'S A PROVEN REFORM
GOVERNOR.
HE HAS REACHED ACROSS THE
AISLES, BUILD A BROAD
COALITION AND DEALT WITH A
VERY DIVERSE STATE.
THE DISADVANTAGES ARE THERE
IS A HALOAFFECT AROUND THE
BUSH NAME.
THERE IS A SUSPICION AMONG
BASE CONSERVATIVES THAT HE
IS IF THE GOING TO BE
FISCALLY CONSERVATIVE
ENOUGH.
WILL FOLLOW IN THE STEPS OF
GEORGE W. BUSH AND BE A BIG
GOVERNMENT CONSERVATIVE.
>> Reporter: ANOTHER
CONSERVATIVE HEADWIND FOR
BUSH WILL BE IMMIGRATION.
THE FORMER GOVERNOR IS
CALLING FOR LEGAL STATUS,
THOUGH NOT CITIZENSHIP, FOR
MILLIONS OF UNDOCUMENTED
RESIDENTS.
AND CALLING OUT HIS PARTY.
>> THE SIMPLE FACT IS THERE
IS NO PLAN TO DEPORT 11
MILLION PEOPLE.
WE SHOULD GIVE THEM A PASS
TO LEGAL STATUS, WHERE THEY
WORK, WHERE THEY DON'T
RECEIVE GOVERNMENT BENEFITS,
WHERE THEY DON'T BREAK THE
LAW, WHERE THEY LEARN
ENGLISH, AND WHERE THEY MAKE
A CONTRIBUTION TO OUR
SOCIETY.
THAT'S WHAT WE NEED TO BE
FOCUSED ON.
>> Reporter: ON FOREIGN
POLICY, BUSH TOOK A MORE
HAWKISH TACT ON A EUROPEAN
TOUR LAST WEEK.
HE HAS CALLED FOR MORE U.S.
TRAINERS IN IRAQ AND FOR A
GREATER MILITARY PRESENCE IN
EASTERN EUROPE TO COUNTER
PUTIN'S RUSSIAN.
>> THIS IS NOT JUST A REASON
NAL ISSUE.
IT'S A GLOBAL ISSUE THAT IN
PARTNERSHIP WITH EUROPE, THE
UNITED STATES IS RESOLUTE
AND IS FIRM AND IS STRONG,
THAT WE CAN CREATE A
DETERRENT THAT WILL BRING
MORE CIVILITY, NOT JUST TO
UKRAINE BUT ALSO TO THE
BILLION CANS.
>> Reporter: THE BACKDROP TO
ALL OF THIS IS A FIGHT FOR
THE FUTURE OF THE REPUBLICAN
PARTY.
WITH BUSH TRYING TO REDEFINE
THE GOP AND HIMSELF PORE
BROADLY.
>> THIS IS A CHANCE TO
REBRAND HIMSELF AND SHARPEN
HIMSELF AS NOT NECESSARILY
THE ESTABLISHMENT REPUBLICAN
BUT A NEW TYPE OF
REPUBLICAN.
IT'S GOING TO BE A DIFFICULT
TASK BUT I THINK HE HAS A
TREMENDOUS TRACK RECORD TO
RUN ON.
>> IT WAS A SPEECH ABOUT
RECORDS FROM A LEGACY
CANDIDATE WHO WENT OUT OF
HIS WAY TO PLAY DOWN THAT
LEGACY.
>> NOT ONE OF US DESERVES
THE JOB BY RIGHT OF RESUME,
PARTY, SENIORITY, FAMILY OR
FAMILY NARRATIVE.
IT'S NOBODY'S TURN.
IT'S EVERYBODY'S TEST.
AND IT'S WIDE OPEN, EXACTLY
AS THE CONTEST FOR PRESIDENT
SHOULD BE.
>>
(CHEERS AND APPLAUSE)
>> NOW OFFICIALLY CANDIDATE
BUSH, HIS NEXT STOP IS NEW
HAMPSHIRE TOMORROW.
LISA DESJARDINS, PBS
NEWSHOUR.
>> Sreenivasan: BUSH ANNOUNCED
TODAY.
HILLARY CLINTON HELD HER FIRST
MAJOR RALLY ON SATURDAY.
NO BETTER TIME TO TALK ABOUT
THIS WEEK OF CAMPAIGN LEGACIES
AND LIFT-OFFS THAN POLITICS
MONDAY.
JOINING ME ARE OUR REGULAR
CONTRIBUTORS-- AMY WALTER OF THE
"COOK POLITICAL REPORT" AND
TAMARA KEITH OF NPR.
>> JEB BUSH LAUNCHES WITH
JUST JEB.
>> EXCLAMATION POINT.
>> EXCLAMATION POINT BUT WE
ALREADY KNEW HE WAS RUNNING.
WHAT IS THE DIFFERENCE
BETWEEN WHEN YOU SAY YOU'RE
RUNNING VERSUS ALL THE WEEKS
LEADING UP TO IT WHEN
EVERYBODY SUSPECTED YOU
WERE.
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
THERE ARE A LOT OF
LIMITATIONS WHEN AWE NOUNCE
YOU ARE A CANDIDATE IN TERMS
OF YOUR ABILITY TO WORK WITH
OUTSIDE GROUPS.
REMEMBER HE HAS A BIG SUPER
PAC THAT HAS BEEN RAISING A
LOT OF MONEY, UNREGULATED,
UNRESTRICTED MONEY.
NOW HE HAS TO RAISE
RESTRICTED MONEY FOR HIS OWN
CAMPAIGNMENT BUT HERE IS
WHAT YOU CAN'T DO WHEN YOU
ARE A NONCANDIDATEMENT YOU
CAN'T REALLY LAY OUT THE
RATIONAL FOR WHY YOU WANT TO
BE PRESIDENT BECAUSE ARE YOU
NOT REALLY TECHNICALLY
RUNNING FOR PRESIDENT.
SO THE DEBATE ABOUT JEB BUSH
HAS BEEN HAPPENING IN A
VACUUM, ALL ABOUT HOW OTHER
PEOPLE FEEL ABOUT JEB BUSH
AND NOT THE CASE THAT HE IS
MICKING FOR HIMSELF ABOUT
WHY HE SHOULD BE PRESIDENT.
THAT IS WHAT THIS KICKOFF
WAS TODAY.
THAT'S WHAT THESE NEXT
COUPLE DAYS ARE GOING TO BE
WHEN HE GOES ON THE ROAD TO
THESE EARLY STATES.
HE HAS BEEN HOBBLED BY THE
FACT THAT THE OTHER PEOPLE
IN THE FIELD HAVE BEEN
DEFINING HIM.
NOW HERE'S HIS CHANCE TO DO
IT FOR HIMSELF.
>> Srennivasan: AND IT'S A
CROWDED FIELD, THIS IS
ALREADY WHAT, NINE, TEN,
DECLARED FOLKS AND THERE ARE
PROBABLY ALREADY FOUR OR
FIVE IN THE WINGS, RIGHT?
>> ABSOLUTELY.
ANOTHER GOVERNOR AT LEAST,
PROBABLY, OR TWO, AT LEAST
ANOTHER TWO GOVERNORS.
YES, AND HE SORT MUCH ELUDED
TO THAT CROWDED FIELD DURING
HIS SPEECH SAYING THERE ARE
A LOT OF US RUNNING.
THAT'S GREAT.
WE SHOULD HAVE A LOT OF US
RUNNING.
AND THAT OUR BIOGRAPHIES,
OUR RESUMES, OUR FAMILY
LEGACIES SHOULDN'T-- DOESN'T
MEAN THAT ANYONE DESERVES
THIS.
WE ALL NEED TO FIGHT IT OUT.
SO I GUESS HE'S
ACKNOWLEDGING THAT HE DIDN'T
BLOW AWAY THE FIELD BEFORE
HE GOT IN.
>> RIGHT, AND THE FAMILY
LEGACY QUESTION IS AN
INTERESTING ONE BECAUSE
CLEARLY SOMEONE THOUGHT
ABOUT THE FACT TO LEAVE BUSH
OFF THE PLA CARD.
>> THERE IS ALSO ANOTHER
CLINTON ON --
>> THERE WHEN YOU TALK TO
THE CLINTON CAMPAIGN, THEY
REFER TO HER AS HILLARY.
SO THEY'RE MAKING VERY, BOTH
OF THESE LEGACY CANDIDATES
ARE MAKING A CONCERTED
EFFORT TO SAY LET'S NOT
FOCUS ON THE LAST NAME PIECE,
LET'S FOCUS ON THE FIRST
NAME.
THE GOOD AND BAD NEWS FOR
JEB BUSH IS HIS LAST NAME,
WHILE IT HAS OPENED A LOT OF
DOORS FOR HIM T IS OBVIOUSLY
A BIG PROBLEM FOR HIM IN
TERMS OF THE FACT THAT SO
MANY FOLKS SEE THAT AS A
NEGATIVE.
SO FOR THE LEGACY PURPOSE
AND THE FACT THAT THEY DON'T
REALLY LIKE GEORGE W. BUSH.
BUT I JUST STILL THINK HE'S
NOT AS WELL DEFINED AS
HILLARY CLINTON IS PEOPLE
REALLY DON'T KNOW WHO JEB
BUSH IS.
HE WAS LAST ON THE SCENE IN
2006 AS A GOVERNOR THAT IN
POLITICAL TERMS IS LIKE
LIGHT-YEARS AGO.
HILL RE CLINTON'S CHALLENGE
IS EVERYBODY THINKS THEY
KNOW WHO SHE IS BUS THEY
HAVE SEN HER AND SHE HAS
BEEN IN THE PUBLIC EYE FOR
25 YEARS.
CAN SHE CHANGE THAT
PERCEPTION.
>> AND BUSH IS STILL JUST
W'S LITTLE BROTHER TO
EVERYBODY.
AND IN HIS SPEECH, HE DID
SAY, I MET MY FIRST
PRESIDENT THE DAY I WAS BORN
AND I MET MY SECOND
PRESIDENT THE DAY I CAME
HOME FROM THE HOSPITAL THAT
WAS HIS WAY OF SORT OF
ELUDING TO HIS FAMILY
LEGACY.
BUT THAT IS WHAT PEOPLE KNOW
ABOUT HIM.
>> RIGHT, RIGHT.
>> SO YOU HAVE BEEN COVERING
HILLARY, SINCE SHE ANNOUNCED
AND EVEN BEFORE THEN, EVEN
IN THE PAST COUPLE OF DAYS,
OBVIOUSLY THERE WAS A LOT OF
ATTENTION, WE PAID ATTENTION
TO IT WHEN SHE LAUNCHED, OR
AT LEAST THAT RALLY.
WHAT HAS SHE BEEN UP TO.
TODAY THE NEWS SEEMS TO BE
MORE ON TRADE AT LEAST ON
THE HILL.
>> RIGHT, THAT WAS THE NEWS
YESTERDAY TOO, WAS ABOUT
TRADE.
ON SATURDAY SHE DID HER BIG
LAUNCH ADDRESS AND SHE
DIDN'T MENTION TRADE.
AND SHE TOOK SOME HEAT FOR
THAT.
THAT IS THE HOTTEST DEBATE
IN DEMOCRATIC POT
PARTICULARS RIGHT NOW AND
SHE DIDN'T TOUCH IT THEN
YESTERDAY IN IOWA, AND I WAS
THERE, SHE WENT ABOUT 20
MINUTES INTO HER SPEECH AND
THEN SHE SORT OF PAUSED,
TURNED AND SAID NOW I'M
GOING TO TALK ABOUT TRADE.
ANDHE I SSN'T TAKING A
POSITION ON IT, REALLY.
YESTERDAY SHE DID HER FIRST
SIT-DOWN INTERVIEWS OF THIS
CAMPAIGN AND THEN TODAY SHE
HELD HER FIRST FORMAL PRESS
CONFERENCE WITH A PODIUM.
>> LET'S TAKE A LISTEN A
PIECE OF SOUND FROM THERE.
>> THE ISSUE FOR ME IS WHAT
IS IN THE DEAL.
AND I THINK NOW THERE'S AN
OPPORTUNITY FOR THE
PRESIDENT AND HIS TEAM TO
REACH OUT AND MEET WITH THE
PEOPLE WHO HAVE SAT ON THE
FLOOR LIKE NANCY PELOSI DID
THAT WE NEED A BETTER DEAL,
NOT I'M AGAINST IT NO MATTER
WHAT IS IN IT OR AS MANY DID,
I'M FOR IT NO MATTER WHAT'S
IN IT.
I THINK THIS IS A CHANCE TO
USE THIS LEVERAGE SO THAT
THE DEAL DOES BECOME ONE
THAT MORE AMERICANS AND MORE
MEMBERS OF CONGRESS CAN VOTE
FOR.
I WILL WAIT AND SEE WHAT THE
DEAL IS AND THEN I WILL TELL
YOU WHAT I THINK ABOUT IT.
>> WAS THERE AN ANSWER
THERE?
>> NO, NO, I COULDN'T FIND
ONE.
>> AND LET ME TRY TO UNPACK
THIS YEAR.
THERE IS THE TRADE DEAL, THE
TRANSPACIFIC PARTNERSHIP
THAT THE PRESIDENT IS
NEGOTIATING.
AND THEN THERE IS TPA
FAST-TRACK TRADE AUTHORITY
THAT THE PRESIDENT WANTS.
HE WAS DELIVERED A DEFEAT ON
THAT LAST WEEK BY CONGRESS.
SO REPORTERS HAVE BEEN
TRYING TO GET HER TO SAY
WELL WA, DO YOU THINK OF TTP
AND SHE SAYS WE HAVE TO SEE
WHAT IS IN THE DEAL.
THEN YOU SAY WHAT DO YOU
THINK OF THE FAST-TRACK
TRADE AUTHORITY, WOULD YOU
VOTE FOR THAT, WOULD YOU
SUPPORT THAT.
AND SHE SAYS WELL, THE
PRESIDENT SHOULD USE THAT
DEFEAT TO NEGOTIATE A BETTER
DEAL ON TRADE BUT SHE
DOESN'T SAY WHETHER SHE
WOULD SUPPORT IT OR NOT.
SHE IS JUST-- SHE'S JUST
TRYING DESPERATELY NOT TO
HAVE TO ACTUALLY TAKE A YES
OR NO POSITION ON THIS
THING.
>> AND THERE ARE ALSO POINTS
OF THE RELATIONSHIP THAT SHE
HAS TO FIGURE OUT WITH THE
PRESIDENT.
>> WITH THE PRESIDENT AND
WITH CONGRESS, OF COURSE.
AND LOOK, SHE NEEDS A STRONG
PRESIDENT GOING INTO 2016,
TO HAVE A PRESIDENT WHO HAS
HAD SUCCESS, WHO HAS A HIGH
APPROVAL RATING, WHO IS
DOING WELL AND SEEN AS
STRONG OVERSEAS.
THIS DOES NOT HELP.
NOW I'M NOT GOING TO ARGUE
THAT LOSING OUR TRADE VOTE
IS THE END OF THE OBAMA
PRESIDENCY AND HIS NUMBERS
ARE GOING TO COLLAPSE AM BUT
SHE BOTH NEEDS TO BE CAREFUL
NOT TO ANGER HER BASE WHICH
COMING OUT AND SUPPORTING
THE PRESIDENT WOULD BE
ANGERING THE BASE.
WHILE ALSO MAKING SURE THAT
THE PRESIDENT DOESN'T LOOK
WEAK.
THAT IS A VERY DIFFICULT
POSITION FOR HER TO BE IN.
SHE DOESN'T WANT TO BE IN
THIS POSITION.
YOU CAN SEE FROM THE ANSWERS
THAT SHE WAS GIVING, JUST
WANTING THIS TO BE OVER.
>> I MEAN THE TRADE POLICY
RIGHT NOW IS ONE OF THE KIND
OF TRIFECTA OF THE OBAMA
LEGACY HE WANTS TO LEAVE
BEHIND.
IT'S THIS THE IRAN-NUCLEAR
DEAL, IT'S CUBA.
WHEN IT COMES TO HIS ENTIRE
-- ENTIRE FOREIGN POLICY F
HE CAN'T GET THROUGH THIS,
DOESN'T THAT MAKE HIM THE
TYPE OF PRESIDENT SHE
DOESN'T NEED GOING INTO THIS
ELECTION?
>> IT CERTAINLY WOULD MAKE
HIM OFFICIALLY TRULY A LAME
DUCK.
AND HE ON THE PRESS I
BUSINESS, I MEAN HE IS LIKE
ABOUT TO BECOME A LAME DUCK.
IF THIS GOES WRONG, YOU KNOW,
THE IRAN NEGOTIATIONS, IT'S
UNCLEAR HOW THAT IS TURNING
OUT.
THIS IS A TIME FOR HIM.
>> ABSOLUTELY, JUNE --, BIG
DEAL BECAUSE YOU HAVE IRAN
DEADLINE.
WE ALSO ARE GOING TO HEAR
FROM THE SUPREME COURT ABOUT
HEALTH CARE WHICH IS HIS
OTHER LEGACY.
THE SUPREME COURT RULES
AGAINST A PIECE OF THE OBAMA
CARE AND THE SUBSIDIES.
THAT'S ANOTHER BLOW TO HIM.
AND THEN OF COURSE AS TAMARA
POINTED OUT, SOME OF THE
OTHER ISSUES COMING UP FOR
HIM.
THE ONE THING I WILL SAY FOR
ABOUT ABOUT TRADE, DEMOCRATS
HAVE NEVER LOVED THE ISSUE
OF TRADE, ALL RIGHT.
SO THE IDEA THAT HE WAS
GOING TO BE ABLE TO GET THIS
OVER THE FINISH LINE WAS
ALWAYS SOMETHING OF A LONG
SHOT.
IF YOU LOOK AT THE HISTORY
OF DEMOCRATS IN THE LAST 15
YEARS, YOU HAVE ONLY GOTTEN
ABOUT 15% OF DEMOCRATS TO
SIGN ON IN THE HOUSE AT
LEAST, TO SIGN ON TO TRADE
BILLS.
AND SO THIS IS SOMETHING
WHERE HE IS REALLY PUSHING A
ROCK UPHILL.
FOR HILLARY CLINTON IT'S
COMING OUT AGAINST SOMETHING
THAT NOT ONLY DOES YOUR BASE
DISLIKE BUT IT DISLIKES
VEHEMENTLY.
>> IT SEEMS LIKE CONGRESS
MIGHT EVEN BE TRYING TO
TABLE THIS OFF FOR LONGER.
>> THEY COULD TAKE IT UP
THIS WEEK.
THEY COULD NOT.
THEY AREN'T SAYING.
I GUESS WE'LL FIND OT SOON
ENOUGH.
>> NPR TAMARA KEITH AND AMY
WALTER, THANK YOU FOR
JOINING US.
SO FIND OUT WHERE JEB BUSH
AND THE OTHER ANNOUNCED
CANDIDATES STAND ON KEY
ISSUES FROM CLIMATE CHANGE
TO IRAQ GERMAN MARK TO OUR
WEB SITE AND OUR WHAT THE
CANDIDATES BELIEVE PAGE AT
PBS.ORG/NEWSHOUR.
>> Sreenivasan: GREEK PRIME
MINISTER ALEXIS TSIPRAS HELD AN
EMERGENCY MEETING TODAY WITH HIS
BAILOUT NEGOTIATORS, AFTER A
WEEKEND BREAKDOWN IN TALKS WITH
CREDITORS BROUGHT THE COUNTRY
CLOSER TO BANKRUPTCY.
TSIPRAS AND HIS SYRIZA PARTY'S
STRONG ANTI-AUSTERITY PLATFORM
WERE CHAMPIONED BY THE EUROPEAN
LEFT AFTER WINNING SNAP
ELECTIONS IN JANUARY.
TODAY HOWEVER, MANY IN GREECE
ARE BRACING FOR MORE TURMOIL
AS THEY WONDER WHETHER THE NEW
GOVERNMENT CAN AVOID A DEFAULT
AT THE END OF THE MONTH.
NEWSHOUR SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT
MALCOLM BRABANT REPORTS FROM
ATHENS.
>> ONE OF THE LARGEST
DEMONSTRATIONS SEEN IN YEARS
SENT A CLEAR MESSAGE TO THE
GREEK GOVERNMENT, THE IMF
AND THE EUROPEAN UNION, WE
CAN'T TAKE ANY MORE.
THIS DASH FOR A FREE MEAL IN
CENTRAL ATHENS EPITOMIZES
GREEK PAIN AND ILLUSTRATES
WHY THE LEFT WING GOVERNMENT
OF THE SYRIZA PARTY IS
DISCREDITING -- IS
HE-TO-DEMANDS TO CUT
PENSIONS FURTHER.
THE SOUP KITCHEN ORGANIZED
BY GREEK AMERICAN FROM AN
EVANGELICAL CHURCH WAS
ORIGINALLY INTENDED TO HELP
MIGRANTS FROM THE DEVELOPING
WORLD.
BUT NOW MANY OF ITS
CUSTOMERS ARE GREEKS, WHO
HAVE PLUNGED BENEATH THE
POVERTY LINE IN A COUNTRY
WHOSE SAFETY NET HAS WATER
AWAY AND PERISHED.
>> MANY DON'T KNOW WHERE
THEY WILL GET THEIR NEXT
MEAL, IF THEY WILL BE
EVICTED SO THERE'S FEAR IN
THEIR LIVES.
AND NOW WITH A 30, 40% SLASH
IN THOSE PENSIONS, MANY OF
THE PEOPLE CANNOT MAKE IT
THROUGH THE WHOLE MONTH SO
WHAT WE'VE SOON AN INCREASE
IS ELDERLY PEOPLE WHO BY THE
15th, 18th, -- OF THE MONTH
HAVE RUN OUT OF MONEY AND
THEY ACTUALLY NEED THIS FOOD.
>> THIS 73-YEAR-OLD IS EON
OF THE MOST IMPOVERISHED
CLIENT OF THE SECOND
EVANGELICAL CHURCH.
>> THERE ISN'T A CRISIS,
THERE'S STILL A LOT OF MONEY
ABOUT.
AN THERE ARE PEOPLE WITHOUT
TAKE THIS MONEY AND LEAVE
OTHERS WITHOUT.
THE CRISIS IS FOR THE POOR.
>> IT'S NO EXAGGERATION TO
SAY THAT THIS FREE CLIN SICK
THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN
LIFE-AND-DEATH FOR THE
CHILDREN OF PERAMA A
DISTRICT RAVAGED BY
UNEMPLOYMENT.
THE CHARITY HELPS THE
POOREST.
BUT WITH LIMITED RESOURCES
AND FACILITIES CONTINUATION
CAN ONLY PROVIDE MINIMAL
CARE.
>> IN SOME CASES WE HAVE TO
FACE THE DIFFICULT
SITUATIONS BECAUSE WE CAN'T
TAKE CARE OF THEM HERE.
THEY NEED TO GO TO HOSPITAL.
AND THAT'S A BIG PROBLEM FOR
THE FAMILIES BECAUSE THEY
CAN'T AFFORD EVEN THE BUS
TICKET TO GO TO PUBLIC
HOSPITAL.
>> FREE MEDICINE IS
ESSENTIAL FOR NIKKOS WHO
FELL BEHIND WITH HIS SOCIAL
SECURITY CONTRIBUTIONS AND
HAS NO STATE PENSION AS A
RESULT.
>> THINGS WERE GOING BADLY.
I HAD A TIMBER YARD WITH 30
EMPLOYEES.
THE FACTORY CLOSED.
I WENT TO PRISON BECAUSE OF
DEBT AND I OWE MONEY TO THE
SOCIAL SECURITY FUND.
>> HE MAY BE IMACCURATELY
DRESSED AND IMBUED WITH
GREEK ENTREPRENEURIAL SPIRIT
BUT GEORGE IS NO LONGER A
SUCCESS.
THIS IS WHAT USED TO BE HIS
SHOP IN A PRIME LOCATION IS
INTENSELY PAINFUL.
>> IT'S A LIFE DISASTER,
THINGS YOU CANNOT BUILD
AGAIN, YOU KNOW.
LOOKING AT YOUR FORTUNE
GETTING LOST.
>> BEFORE THE CRISIS, HE HAD
13 SHOPS EMPLOYING 49 PEOPLE
WITH AN ANNUAL TURNOVER OF
$5.5 MILLION DOLLARS.
THE LACK OF CASH CIRCULATING
HAS FORCED HIM DOWN TO ONE
STORE ON A SIDE STREET.
HE COULD STILL GO TO JAIL
AND LOSE HIS HOME OVER TAX
DEBTS.
>> IF THE BUSINESS COLLAPSES,
THERE IS NO DAY AFTER.
IT IS FINISHED.
IN GREECE, WE DON'T HAVE A
NICE SECOND CHANCE.
THE PRIVATE SECTOR IS ALMOST
DYING.
WE CANNOT FIND SOURCES ON
LIQUIDITY.
WE CANNOT FIND PRODUCTS.
SO WE HAVE TO DO SOMETHING.
AND WE NEED TIME.
AND WE NEED TIME TO BREATHE.
>> Reporter: BUT TIME IS
RUNNING OUT.
GREECE HAS BEEN TEETERING ON
THE BRINK OF TOTAL DISASTER
FOR THE PAST FIVE YEARS AND
IT'S RAPIDLY APPROACHING THE
MOST IMPORTANT DEADLINE OF
ALL.
IF IT CAN'T PAY 1.8 BILLION
TO THE INTERNATIONAL
MONETARY FUND BY THE END OF
THE MONTH, THE COUNTRY WILL
BE DECLARED OFFICIALLY
BANKRUPT.
>> IANIST CONTROLS THE
NATIONAL PURSE THAT IS
VIRTUALLY EMPTY.
THE GREEK FINANCE MINISTER
IT INFURIATEED INTERNATIONAL
CREDITORS BY REFUSING TO
SUCCOMB TO THEIR DEMANDS.
>> FOR FIVE YEARS NOW THE
INTERNIONAATL COMMUNITY AND
THE GREEK PEOPLE IN
PARTICULAR HAVE HAD ENOUGH
OF THE GREEK CRISIS.
THEY'VE BEEN EXTENSIONS OF
THE PROBLEM.
WE'VE BEEN EXTENDING AND
PRETENDING, EXTENDING THE
PROBLEM AND PRETENDING WE
SOLVE THIS.
AND IT'S ABOUT TIME THAT WE
HAD ONE AGREEMENT WHICH IS
COMPREHENSIVE, WHICH
COMPROMISES THREE ASPECTS.
FIRSTLY REFORMS, SECONDLY
DEBT MANAGEMENT PROGRAM OR
DEBT RESTRUCTURE PROGRAM,
AND THIRDLY, AN INVESTMENT
PACKAGE SO THAT THE GREEK
CRISIS GOES AWAY.
>> THERE ARE SOME IN GREECE,
HOWEVER, WHO THINK THE NEW
GOVERNMENT IS OVERPLAYING
ITS HAND.
THE PREVIOUS CONSERVATIVE
ADMINISTRATON WIAS MUCH MORE
CONCILIATORY WITH THE
COUNTRY'S CREDITORS.
IN 2014 ATHENS POSTED MODEST
POSITIVE GDP NUMBERS.
THE FORMER PRIME MINISTER IS
DAMN BEING THE SERIES OF
GOVERNMENTS NEGOTIATE DK --
THE SYRIZA GOVERNMENT
NEGOTIATING.
>> THE GOVERNMENT PROMISED
IT A BETTER DEAL TO THE
GREEK PEOPLE WHILE STAYING
WITHIN THE EURO BUT IT LOOKS
LIKE THEY'RE BRING A WORSE
DEAL WITH ANOTHER NEW
BAILOUT OR EVEN BANKRUPTCY
IT PROMISED IT WOULD RECEIVE
FINANCIAL AID WITHOUT A
BAILOUT AND ENDED UP
EXTENDING THE BAILOUT
WITHOUT GETTING ANY MONEY.
>> MEANWHILE THE CRITICISM
ON THE LEFT TOWARDS THE
SYRIZA GOVERNMENT HAS BEEN
PUBLIC AND CONFRONTATIONAL.
COMMUNISTS, TRADE UNIONISTS
OCCUPY THE FINANCE MINISTRY
A FEW DAYS AGO.
THEY UNIF YOU RECALLED A
BANNER THAT SAID WE BLED
ENOUGH, WE PAID ENOUGH.
ANOTHER BUILDING OCCUPATION
BY FORMER STATE EMPLOYEES
THERE WAS ANGER THAT THE NEW
GOVERNMENT HAS REFUSED TO
REHIRE THEM AND IS STICKING
WITH INTERNATIONAL DEMANDS.
>> I HAD SOME HOPES AND I
VOTE TO BE HONEST WITH YOU,
I VOTE THAT PARTY BECAUSE
IRBELIEVED IN THAT PARTY.
AND THAT PARTY GAVE US A
THREAT OR SOMETHING AND THAT
WAS OUR PROBLEM.
>> WE LOST OUR FAITH.
>> FROM ONE OF ATHENS MAIN
SHOPPING STREETS THIS
SHUTTERED MALL IS A
CATHEDRAL TO AUSTERITY.
>> SO WILL GREECE HAVE TO
RETURN TO THE TRACK MARKS
THE WORLD'S OLDEST CURRENCY?
A GERMAN ECONOMIST SPENT TWO
YEARS WITH THE EUROPEAN
UNION TASK FORCE HELPING TO
RECAPITALIZE GREEK BANKS IN
THE EARLY DAYS OF THE
CRISIS.
>> I DON'T ENTERTAIN THE
OPTION THAT GREECE WILL
LEAVE THE EURO, THERE ARE
VOICES AND THEY'RE GAINING
IN STRENGTH THAT ADVOCATE
SUCH AN OPTION.
BUT IT WOULD BE CATASTROPHIC
FOR THE BANKING SECTOR, FOR
THE PRIVATE HOUSEHOLDS AND
BUSINESSES WHO ARE INDEBTED,
IN MANY WAYS THIS IS A
NONSTARTER.
>> AFTER FIVE YEARS OF THE
GREECE ECONOMY ENDURING
-- BILLETING AND NEVER
ENDING-- THE TRADERS AT
ATHEN FISH MARKET ARE
DESPERATE FOR RELIEF.
>> THE PEOPLE ARE VERY
AFRAID ABOUT THEIR MONEY.
SO THEY'RE VERY TIGHT.
THEY'RE AFRAID TO BUY ALSO
FOOD, IF THEY DON'T PAY US,
WE CANNOT PAY OTHER PEOPLE.
IT AFFECTS THE SUPPLIES.
NO MONEY LEFT FOR LIVING.
WE'RE JUST WORKING-- WE'RE
JUST TRANSPORTING THE MONEY.
>> Reporter: PROT TESTERS
DEMANDS FOR RESISTANCE TO
THE INTERNATIONAL CREDITORS
SEEM TO OUTWEIGH RECOGNITION
THAT UNLESS GREECE AGREES TO
ADDITIONAL MEASURES IT WILL
NOT BE ABLE TO ACCESS MORE
THAN $8 BILLION FROM THE
BAILOUT PROGRAM.
TO KEEP THE COUNTRY AFLOAT
AND LIMIT THE CONTINUED
FLIGHT OF ITS YOUNGEST AN
FINEST.
>> I FEAR HOW I WILL FIND A
JOB.
HOW DIFFICULT THAT WOULD BE.
IF THERE IS A FUTURE HERE IN
GREECE, BECAUSE I WANT TO
STAY.
I MEAN GREECE IS MY HOMETOWN,
MAY HOME COUNTRY.
I LOVE IT HERE.
I WANT TO STAY.
BUT.
>> AS GREECE MARCHES TOWARDS
THE ABYSS, THE WISE HEADS OF
THE ANCIENTS ARE NEEDED MORE
THAN EVER, FOR THE PBS
NEWSHOUR THIS IS MALCOLM
BRABANT IN ATHENS
>> Sreenivasan: MORE THAN FIVE
DECADES AFTER THE U.S. AND CUBA
SEVERED TIES, CUBA IS POISED FOR
SOME BIG CHANGES IN ITS
RELATIONS WITH THE UNITED
STATES, AND THE WAY BUSINESS IS
DONE THERE.
IN JUST A MATTER OF WEEKS, THE
OBAMA ADMINISTRATION IS EXPECTED
TO ANNOUNCE THAT BOTH COUNTRIES
WILL OPEN EMBASSIES IN EACH
OTHER'S CAPITAL.
LAST MONTH, THE U.S. REMOVED
CUBA FROM ITS TERRORISM LIST.
AT THE SAME TIME, THE CUBAN
GOVERNMENT IS ALLOWING MORE
PRIVATE ENTERPRISE.
IT'S A MOMENT WHEN CUBA IS
PREPARING FOR A VERY DIFFERENT
RELATIONSHIP WITH ITS AMERICAN
NEIGHBORS.
JEFFREY BROWN HAS THE STORY, THE
FIRST IN A SPECIAL WEEKLONG
SERIES ABOUT "THE CUBAN
EVOLUTION," FOCUSING ON
SIGNIFICANT SHIFTS IN ITS
POLITICS, BUSINESS, ARTS AND
CULTURE.
>> Brown: A SECOND-FLOOR BED AND
BREAKFAST ON A CARIBBEAN ISLAND,
HOME TO TATIANA ZUNI'GA AND HER
EXTENDED FAMILY.
SO HERE YOU CAN SIT AT
BREAKFAST?
>> CI, CI ENJOY YOUR BREAKFAST.
>> Brown: BUT, THIS IS THE
ISLAND OF CUBA.
AND TATIANA'S ROOMS ARE NOW
AVAILABLE THROUGH AIRBNB, THE
SAN FRANCISCO-BASED ONLINE
SERVICE, A BIT OF FLEDGLING
CAPITALISM IN THE HOME OF THE
HEMISPHERE'S SOCIALIST
REVOLUTION.
REVOLUTION. >> (
translated): AIRBNB HAS
>> (translated): AIRBNB
HAS ALREADY BEEN ESTABLISHED IN
THIS
ALREADY BEEN ESTABLISHED IN THIS
BUSINESS, AND THEY ARE PRECEDED
BY GREAT CREDENTIALS, SO WE'RE
GETTING INTO SOMETHING THAT IS
ALREADY STRUCTURED, AND THAT
WILL HELP GREATLY.
>> Brown: HELP TATIANA.
AND HELP VISITORS.
FOR, YES, THE AMERICANS ARE
COMING.
STROLLING THROUGH A COLONIAL
SQUARE, RIDING IN OPEN AIR TOUR
BUSES, TAKING SELFIES WITH CHE
GUEVARA IN REVOLUTION SQUARE.
IN FACT, WE SAW MORE AMERICAN
FLAGS, EVEN IF PEOPLE WERE
WEARING THEM, THAN PORTRAITS OF
FIDEL.
AND MANY CUBANS WE MET ARE
SAYING: COME ON DOWN.
SAYING: COME ON DOWN. >> (
translated): WE ALWAYS
>> (translated): WE
ALWAYS LOVE UNITED STATES PEOPLE
AND
LOVE UNITED STATES PEOPLE AND
THIS IS GOD'S DOING, THAT HE IS
MAKING POSSIBLE THIS UNION.
I'M SAYING TO OBAMA AND TO OUR
PRESIDENT, TO MAKE THIS
POSSIBLE.
>> Brown: AND WHY NOT?
MUSIC EVERYWHERE, WORLD FAMOUS
CIGARS, SPARKLING BEACHES,
THE ROMANCE OF A TIME GONE BY.
SO OLD CARS AND ALL, IS CUBA
OPEN FOR AMERICAN BUSINESS AND
TOURISM?
WELL, NO.
TENTATIVELY AT BEST.
BUT DOES IT SEEM TO BE OPENING?
YES, AND WE FOUND SIGNS
EVERYWHERE.
THIS GROUP OF AMERICAN FOODIES
CAME ON A CULINARY TOUR OF
HAVANA.
WE JOINED THEM ON A VISIT TO AN
ORGANIC FARM, AND LATER AT A
RESTAURANT.
TRAVELING HERE IS STILL
COMPLICATED.
TOURISM IS NNEDBA UNDER THE U.S.
EMBARGO.
SO VISITORS ST QMUUALIFY IN ONE
OF 12 CATEGORIES OF LICENSED
TRAVEL, INCLUDING SO-CALLED
EDUCATIONAL PEOPLE-TO-PEOPLE
TRIPS.
>> SUDDENLY, EVERYBOBY HAS CUBA
ON THEIR RADAR.
VIRTUALLY ALL AMERICANS HAVE
NEVER BEEN TO CUBA, THE COUNTRY
IS 90 MILES SOUTH OF FLORIDA,
IT'S SO CLOSE AND IT'S
INTERESTING BECAUSE NOBODY'S
BEEN HERE.
IT'S BEEN A, LET'S CALL IT A
FORBIDDEN FRUIT OR AN OFF-LIMITS
ISLAND.
>> Brown: ERIC NORBER'S COMPANY,
"CULTURAL CONTRAST," HAS BEEN
LEADING THESE TOURS FOR 25
YEARS, AND JUMPED FROM TWO TO
THREE A YEAR TO A BOOMING 20
TRIPS BOOKED IN THE NEXT 12
MONTHS.
IN A COUNTRY WHERE THE
GOVERNMENT STILL RUNS PRETTY
MUCH EVERYTHING, NEW LAWS ALLOW
MORE PRIVATE OWNERSHIP.
AND THAT WAS ENOUGH TO LURE
ALEJANDRO MARCEL TO RETURN FROM
VENEZUELA TO RENOVATE HIS
MOTHER'S HOUSE INTO A FANCY NEW
RESTAURANT.
THIS IS A RESTAURANT THAT COULD
BE IN ANYPLACE.
YOU KNOW?
YOU'RE LAUGHING.
IT'S FUNNY THAT IT'S HERE IN
HAVANA.
>> I KNOW.
I BEEN MANY PLACE.
I SAW RESTAURANTS ALL OVER THE
WORLD.
>> Brown: BUT HE ALSO ADDED
THIS.
THIS. >> (translated
): IT IS HARD,
>> (translated): IT IS
HARD, VERY HARD TO FIND THE
RIGHT
VERY HARD TO FIND THE RIGHT
PRODUCTS, THE RIGHT INGREDIENTS,
TO RUN A RESTAURANT TO CERTAIN
STANDARDS, IT IS DEFINITELY
HARD.
>> Brown: "IT'S HARD": AND WE
SAW THAT, TOO: A PLACE OF NEED
ANDANT. W
THOSE CARS?
SYMBOLS OF A COUNTRY, LIVING
UNDER AN EMBARGO, OUTSIDE THE
MODERN GLOBAL ECONOMY.
CUBA HASN'T FULLY RECOVERED FROM
THE CRISIS BROUGHT ON AFTER THE
COLLAPSE OF THE SOVIET UNION,
WHOSE SUBSIDIES KEPT THE COUNTRY
FINANCIALLY AFLOAT.
SOME CUBANS ARE FORCED TO BEG.
OTHERS USE THEIR RATION CARDS TO
BUY A BIT OF CHICKEN AT A
GOVERNMENT SHOP.
DISPARITIES ARE GROWING, BASED
ON WHO HAS ACCESS TO DOLLARS
FROM OUTSIDE CUBA, MAINLY FROM
FAMILIES IN THE U.S. FOR
EXAMPLE.
EVERYONE SPOKE TO US OF ECONOMIC
HARDSHIP, AND THE DESIRE TO HAVE
BETTER RELATIONS WITH THE U.S.
TO HELP OVERCOME IT.
YANIUYS VILLAFANA OWNS A SMALL
PIZZA SHOP.
PIZZA SHOP. >> (
translated): ALL THE
>> (translated): ALL
THE CUBANS RIGHT NOW THAT ARE IN
CUBANS RIGHT NOW THAT ARE IN
NEED OF WORK, AND A BETTER
INCOME RIGHT NOW, AS OF MYSELF,
I'M PREGNANT, AND I'M WORKING
HERE IN THIS BUSINESS, AND I
HAVE TO MAKE A BETTER LIFE FOR
MY CHILD.
>> Brown: REMEMBER TATIANA,
TAKING AIRBNB BOOKINGS?
LOOK AT HER T-SHIRT: "NO ES
FACIL"-- "IT'S NOT EASY."
AND IT'S NOT.
LIKE MOST CUBANS, SHE HAS NO
INTERNET SERVICE AND MUST GO TO
AN INTERNATIONAL HOTEL OR
GOVERNMENT OFFICE, AND PAY A LOT
FOR LOUSY SERVICE.
FOR LOUSY SERVICE. >> (
translated): GETTING
>> (translated):
GETTING ONLINE IS PAINFULLY
SLOW.
ONLINE IS PAINFULLY SLOW.
IT TAKES FOREVER TO OPEN AND
UPDATE THE GUEST CALENDAR.
SOMETIMES I GET THE FEELING I'M
GETTING OLDER JUST WAITING FOR
THE PAGE TO LOAD.
>> Brown: FOR TOURISTS, THERE
AREN'T ENOUGH INTERNATIONAL
HOTELS, NO U.S. BANKS AND NO
AMERICAN CREDIT CARD SERVICES.
>> THE CHALLENGE HERE IS REALLY
ONE OF INFRASTRUCTURE.
THEY DON'T HAVE THE CAPACITY TO
SUDDENLY HAVE SUCH A HIGH VOLUME
OF TOURISTS.
HOTEL SPACE ISN'T AVAILABLE,
TRANSPORTATION, INFRASTRUCTURE
IN EVERY REGARD.
>> Brown: WE HEARD OTHER, VERY
DIFFERENT REASONS FOR CAUTION
FROM SEVERAL CUBANS, INCLUDING
87-YEAR-OLD CARMEN BLANCO BOYCE,
WHO WORKED FOR AN AMERICAN
COMPANY HERE BUT SUPPORTED THE
REVOLUTION.
SHE WELL REMEMBERS WHAT SHE
CALLS THE BAD OLD DAYS OF
AMERICANS IN CUBA.
>> WE WERE NOTHING, YOU KNOW.
WE WERE NOTHING, WE WERE NOBODY,
AND THEY COULD DO WITH CUBA
WHATEVER THEY WANT.
>> Brown: TODAY, SHE WORRIES
ABOUT A NEW ONSLAUGHT OF
AMERICAN CAPITAL AND INFLUENCE.
>> I WANT TO BE A FRIEND OF THE
UNITED STATES, BECAUSE I LOVE
YOUR COUNTRY.
BUT I'M VERY, VERY SCARED THAT
THINGS WON'T COME OUT AS WANI T.
>> Brown: BUT YOU'RE SCARED OF
WHAT...
>> THAT THINGS WON'T COME OUT AS
I THINK THEY SHOULD.
>> Brown: AND THERE ARE ALSO
THOSE, LIKE 26-YEAR-OLD MANUEL
MONS, PART OF A DISSIDENT GROUP
CALLED "SOMOS MAS"-- "WE ARE
MORE"-- WHO WANT AMERICANS TO
SEE THE CUBA THEY SEE: FOR ALL
THE TENTATIVE OPENINGS, STILL A
ONE-PARTY, REPRESSIVE STATE.
ONE-PARTY, REPRESSIVE STATE. >>
(translated): THE CUBAN
>> (translated): THE
CUBAN PEOPLE ARE NOT FREE.
PEOPLE ARE NOT FREE.
IN CUBA, THINKING INDEPENDENTLY
IS PROHIBITED.
IT'S WRITTEN IN THE
CONSTITUTION.
THINKING INDEPENDENTLY FROM THE
GOVERNMENT IS ILLEGAL.
>> Brown: THE CONTRADICTIONS OF
A STILL-EVOLVING SITUATION: COME
TO CUBA, IF YOU CAN, AND WATCH
THE CHANGES UNFOLD.
FROM HAVANA, I'M JEFFREY BROWN
FOR THE PBS NEWSHOUR.
>> Sreenivasan: TOMORROW, JEFF
REPORTS ON EFFORTS TO BRING
MODERN DEVELOPMENT, DESIGN AND
CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE TO THE
CITY OF HAVANA WHILE STILL
MAINTAINING ITS HISTORIC
AESTHETIC AND CHARACTER.
DECADES OF DEFERRED
MAINTENANCE.
YOU SEE INFRASTRUCTURE
THAT'S FALLING PART, CRACKED
BUILDINGS, DIRT, CORE ROSE,
BUT TO ME THAT IS NOT NEARLY
AS POTENTIALLY DESTRUCTIVE
AS WHAT CAN HAPPEN IF
DEVELOPERS COME IN HERE AND
THEY DON'T PROTECT THE CITY.
AND TLSES'S MORE ON-LINE.
WE SAT DOWN WITH CUBAN POET
OMAR PEREZ WHO IS ALSO THE
SN OF REVOLUTIONARY ERNESTO
CHE GUIVARO, HE READ ONE OF
THE WORKS ON YOU WHICH YOU
CAN SEE ON OUR HOME PAGE.
>> Sreenivasan: AS MANY STUDENTS
FINISH SCHOOL THIS MONTH, A NEW
DOCUMENTARY TELLS THE STORY OF
ONE SCHOOL'S STRUGGLE TO BREAK
THE CYCLE OF POVERTY FOR ITS
STUDENTS.
AMY SCOTT, FROM AMERICAN PUBLIC
MEDIA'S RADIO PROGRAM
"MARKETPLACE" BRINGS US A TWO-
PART LOOK AT THE OYLER SCHOOL IN
CINCINNATI.
TONIGHT'S FOCUS, PRINCIPAL CRAIG
HOCKENBERRY.
>> A LITTLE GIRL COMING IN,
THIRD GRADER, COVERED IN DIRT,
WITH ONE FLIP-FLOP.
THE OTHER ONE BUSTED ON THE WAY
IN.
THIS WAS JANUARY.
I COULD CALL HER MOM AND SAY,
WHERE'S HER SHOES.
BE MAD AND CALL 241-KIDS AND SAY
THIS IS NEGLECT, OR I COULD JUST
FIND A WAY TO GET THIS GIRL A
SHOE.
I WANT TO DO SOMETHING THAT'S
MUCH, MUCH DIFFERENT THAN
PROBABLY A LOT OF PRINCIPALS.
I WANT THE BOARDS TO COME DOWN
OFF THE HOUSES.
I WANT LESS CRIME, AND PEOPLE
FROM OUTSIDE OUR COMMUNITY
COMING IN ND SELALING DRUGS.
I WANT TO START WORKING ON THE
NEIGHBORHOOD, THE STREETS.
GOOD MORNING, WE'RE ALL A LITTLE
LOST HERE AREN'T WE?
>> Reporter: IT'S THE FIRST DAY
AT OYLER SCHOOL AFTER A TWO-
YEAR, 21-MILLION DOLLAR
RENOVATION.
>> K TO SIX, LINE UP RIGHT HERE.
HIGH SCHOOL ON THE FAR DOOR,
SEVENTH AND EIGHTH GRADE OVER
HERE.
>> Reporter: THE SCHOOL MAY BE
NEW, BUT THE CHALLENGES REMAIN
THE SAME.
AS PRINCIPAL, CRAIG HOCKENBERRY
HAS OVERSEEN FIVE CONSECUTIVE
YEARS OF GROWTH ON STATE TEST
SCORES, BUT OYLER REMAINS IN THE
BOTTOM FIVE PERCENT OF ALL OHIO
SCHOOLS.
THE STATE IS DEMANDING STRONGER
GROWTH, AND HAS GIVEN
HOCKENBERRY UNTIL THE END OF THE
SCHOOL YEAR TO PROVE HE CAN LEAD
THE TURNAROUND.
>> AND THEN THE TEACHERS WILL BE
RIGHT UP TOP THERE.
>> Reporter: OYLER IS IN LOWER
PRICE HILL, A NEIGHBORHOOD
TRADITIONALLY KNOWN FOR ITS
URBAN APPALACHIAN CULTURE.
>> WHEN THE COAL MINES AND THE
JOBS LEFT IN KENTUCKY, WEST
VIRGINIA, A LOT OF THE FAMILIES
MIGRATED TO THE URBAN CENTERS TO
GET JOBS.
THERE WAS HUNDREDS OF JOBS AND
FACTORIES AROUND HERE.
A LOT OF THOSE ARE GONE NOW.
IT'S KIND OF BECOME AN ECONOMIC
DESERT.
I COULD WALK YOU OUTSIDE THE
DOOR, NOT EVEN 15 STEPS AWAY,
AND I COULD PROBABLY GET JUST
ABOUT ANY DRUG THAT I WANT.
I COULD WALK YOU ANOTHER 15 FEET
DOWN AND THERE ARE OUR PARENTS
THAT ARE PROSTITUTING AND ARE
HOOKED ON HEROIN AND CRACK
COCAINE.
JOHN, YOU'RE TRYING TO HIDE FROM
ME.
YES YOU ARE.
COME HERE.
YOU ARE HIDING FROM ME, AND I
KNOW EXACTLY WHY.
>> NO, I'M NOT HIDING FROM YOU.
>> YOU LOOK LIKE A ZOMBIE.
>> IN ORDER TO REVITALIZE THE
SCHOOL, YOU HAVE TO GO HAND AND
HAND WITH REVITALIZING THE
NEIGHBORHOOD.
WE HAVE OUR OWN SCHOOL-BASED
HEALTH CENTER, OUR OWN VISION
CENTER.
>> Reporter: OYLER IS PART OF A
GROWING NATIONAL MOVEMENT TO
MAKE THE NEIGHBORHOOD SCHOOL A
HUB FOR ITS COMMUNITY--
COMBINING ACADEMIC, HEALTH, AND
SOCIAL SERVICES UNDER ONE ROOF.
>> IF SOMEONE FROM THE COMMUNITY
NEEDS SOMETHING, THE ONLY THING
THEY HAVE TO DO IS COME TO THE
SCHOOL BUILDING.
MOUNTAIN DEW IN THE MORNING,
SIR?
I DON'T THINK SO.
>> Reporter: HOCKENBERRY IS ALL
IN.
KNOWING THAT GETTING THE KIDS TO
SCHOOL IS KEY TO LEARNING AND
PERFORMING WELL ON THE TESTS.
>> MS. BURNS.
WHO YOU WAITING ON?
YOU ALL RIGHT?
SOMETHING'S GOING ON HERE WE
DON'T KNOW ABOUT.
WE'VE GOT KIDS WHO HAVEN'T SHOWN
UP IN 100 DAYS, 50 DAYS, 60
DAYS.
THEY'RE NOT GOING TO SHOW UP ON
TESTING DAY, SO THEY'RE GOING TO
HAVE AN IMPACT ON SOME OF OUR
SCORES.
GENTLEMEN, I KNOW WHERE YOU GO
TO SCHOOL, AND I KNOW WHERE YOU
LIVE.
ALEX CHATMAN JUST TOOK OFF
RUNNING FROM ME THROUGH AN
ALLEY.
COULD YOU CONTACT HIS FATHER AND
LET HIM KNOW HE'S SKIPPING?
ALRIGHTY, MR. MITCHELL.
GUYS, COME ON.
I KNOW EVERY CORNER, EVERY INCH
OF THIS PLACE.
DO YOU GUYS UNDERSTAND THAT?
AND I'M GOING TO CATCH YOU,
EVERY SINGLE TIME YOU DO IT.
I'M BASICALLY ON CALL 24 HOURS A
DAY.
ANY GIVEN MOMENT, I COULD BE
WORKING TILL MIDNIGHT AND UP BY
5:00.
>> WHEN I FIRST SAW HIM, I KNEW
THERE WAS SOMETHING DIFFERENT
ABOUT HIM.
I TOLD HIM FROM THE VERY
BEGINNING, YOU ARE DESTINED TO
CHANGE LIVES.
SOMETIMES I HAVE TO LITERALLY
TELL HIM TO TURN, TAKE HIS FACE
OUT OF HIS CRACKBERRY, AND GIVE
ME SOME FACE TIME.
>> ONE OF OUR PARENTS OF THREE
CHILDREN WAS SHOT AND KILLED
LAST NIGHT.
SHE WAS HAVING SOME PROBLEMS
WITH DRUGS.
UNFORTUNATELY THIS IS SOMETHING
WE'RE GOOD AT RESPONDING ABOUT.
I'D RATHER WE WERE GOOD AT
RESPONDING TO FOOTBALL GAMES AND
BASKETBALL GAMES.
THERE WAS A LITTLE NOTE IN
THERE.
SHE WROTE, I LOVE YOU, MOM, I'LL
MISS YOU, MOM.
HERE'S A BOOK TO READ IN HEAVEN.
I'M GOING TO DRAG THEM THREE
KIDS ACROSS THE FINISH LINE, NO
MATTER WHAT HAPPENS.
HEYERIC.,
HOW YOU FEELING, MAN?
I'M REALLY SORRY AUT WBOHAT
HAPPENED, MAN.
I'M REALLY SORRY.
I NEEDED YOU AT SCHOOL TODAY.
YOU GOING TO BE THERE FOR ME
TOMORROW?
>> I'LL TRY.
>> THE PEOPLE, FICTIONAL
CREATURE AND ANIMAL THAT ARE
PART OF THE STORY.
>> YEP, THAT'S IT.
>> THERE'S A LEVEL OF CONCERN
RIGHT NOW ABOUT HOW OUR SCORES
WILL BE.
WE HAVEN'T THROWN IN THE TOWEL
YET, BY ANY MEANS, BUT WE'RE
DEFINITELY RIGHT NOW FIGHTING AN
UPHILL BATTLE.
>> THERE IS A LOOF PRET SSURE ON
TEACHERS FOR TEST SCORES.
WE SPEND A LOT OF TIME PREPARING
OUR CHILDREN.
SOME OF OUR CHILDREN ARE VERY
FAR BEHIND.
>> SOMETIMES IT FEELS UNFAIR TO
BE MEASURED IN THE SAME WAY AS
OTHER SCHOOLS IN THE STATE.
THEIR PERFORMANCE ON THOSE TESTS
ARE GOING TO DETERMINE WHETHER
OR NOT THE STATE BELIEVES THAT
WE HAVE IMPROVED ENOUGH TO KEEP
OUR PRINCIPAL.
>> Reporter: AS THE STATE
CONTINUES TO ASSESS PRINCIPAL
HOCKENBERRY'S PERFORMANCE,
ANOTHER CRISIS HITS.
THE CINCINNATI SCHOOL DISTRICT
IS FACING A $46 MILLION BUDGET
GAP.
>> DEAR MR. HOCKENBERRY, THANKS
FOR YOUR SERVICE.
IN ORDINANCE WITH THE OHIO
REVISED CODE, THIS IS TO INFORM
YOU THAT YOUR ADMINISTRATIVE
CONTRACT EXPIRES, AND YOUR
SERVICES WILL NO LONGER BE
NEEDED.
YOU KNOW IT HAPPENED ONCE BEFORE
IN MY CAREER, AND WE FOUND OUT
THE VERY NEXT DAY WE ALL GOT
BROUGHT BACK.
BUT REGARDLESS, WHATEVER
HAPPENS, ONE DEAD MONKEY DON'T
STOP THE CIRCUS DOWN HERE AT
OYLER, AND IT'S A GOOD SCHOOL.
'SUP, NATE.
>> HELLO THERE.
HOW YOU DOING?
>> GOOD.
GRADUATION TONIGHT.
BIG PARTY.
BIG PARTY ON STATE STREET.
SHE FORGOT TO COME TO SCHOOL
THIS MORNING.
OH.
WHO SUSPENDED YOU.
ME?
LOOKS LIKE THEY BROUGHT ME BACK.
SO WE'RE MOVING IN THE RIGHT
DIRECTION.
>> Reporter: THE SCHOOL DISTRICT
RENEWS HOCKENBERRY'S CONTRACT,
BUT OYLER STILL AWAITS A
DECISION FROM THE STATE.
>> YEAH, YEAH.
I WANT TO LEAVE WITH CLASS.
THERE'S A LOT OF PEOPLE I'D LIKE
TO SAY MY MIND TO, BUT IT WON'T
HELP ANYTHING, YOU KNOW.
>> Reporter: IN LATE JUNE, THE
NEWS COMES.
THE STATE ORDERS CINCINNATI
PUBLIC SCHOOLS TO REPLACE
HOCKENBERRY, BASED ON OYLER'S
TEST SCORES AND GRADUATION RATE.
>> YEAH.
I RESIGNED LAST NIGHT AFTER 15
YEARS AT OYLER.
BEFORE THE DISTRICT CAN APPEAL,
HOCKENBERRY HAS ACCEPTED ANOTHER
JOB.
>> Reporter: HE'LL BE
SUPERINTENDENT OF SCHOOLS IN
RURAL MANCHESTER, OHIO.
>> Sreenivasan: PRINCIPAL
HOCKENBERRY IS NOW A
SUPERINTENDENT OF SCHOOLS IN
SOUTHERN OHIO JUST OUTSIDE
CINCINNATI.
TOMORROW WE GET THE STUDENT'S
VIEW.
FOR MORE ON THE SCHOOL AND THE
FILM CHECK OUT marketplace.org
ONLINE.
>> Sreenivasan: NOW, THE LATEST
ADDITION TO THE NEWSHOUR
BOOKSHELF.
SHE WAS BORN INTO A LIFE OF
PRIVILEGE AMIDST TERROR.
HER FATHER WAS DISTANT, AND ONE
BY ONE THOSE CLOSEST TO HER
VANISHED UNTIL SHE HERSELF
DEFECTED LEAVING PART OF HER
FAMILY BEHIND IN THE SOVIET
UNION.
HER STORY IS TOLD IN THE NEW
BIOGRAPHY "STALIN'S DAUGHTER:
THE EXTRAORDINARY TIMES AND
TUMULTUOUS LIFE OF SVETLANA
ALLILUYEVA," BY ROSEMARY
SULLIVAN.
RECENTLY JUDY WOODRUFF TALKED
WITH HER, AND SVETLANA'S
AMERICAN DAUGHTER CHRIS EVANS.
>> ROSEMARY SULLIVAN, CHRIS
EVANS, THANK YOU VERY MUCH
FOR JOINING US.
>> THANK YOU.
>> PLEASURE TO BE HERE.
>> ROSEMARY SULLIVAN, THERE
IS A LOT OF NEW MATERIAL IN
HERE.
YOU WERE ABLE TO GET ACCESS
TO POLITBURO NOTES, CIA
FILES WHAT DO YOU THINK YOU
ULTIMATELY WERE ABLE TO ADD
TO HER STORY?
>> I DON'T THINK ANYBODY HAS
BEEN ABLE TO SPEAK TO THE
NUMBER OF PEOPLE I SPOKE TO.
I WAS ABLE TO INTERVIEW 40
DIFFERENT PEOPLE IN RUSSIA,
IN GEORGIA, IN LONDON, IN
THE UNITED STATES.
I WAS ABLE TO GET THE FBI
FILES,ED CIA FILES, SOME
DOCUMENTS WHEN I WENT TO
RUSSIA IN THE STATE
ARCHIVES.
SO IT WAS PRECISELY THE
RIGHT MOMENT TO WRITE THE
BOOK BECAUSE ALL THAT
MATERIAL COULD BE BROUGHT
TOGETHER IN A WAY THAT I
DONE THINK HAS BEEN KNOWN
BEFORE.
AND SVETLANA'S STORY IS SO
DIFFERENT FROM HER FATHER'S
STORY, YOU THINK YOU KNOW
STALIN AND THEN YOU FIND HIS
DAUGHTER, THIS WOMAN OF
PRINCIPLES, OF INTELLIGENCE,
OF HUMANITARIAN IMPULSES.
>> Woodruff: DIFFERENT FROM
THE PRISONER OF THIS
TERRIBLE SET OF
CIRCUMSTANCES THAT WAS
TAKING PLACE WHEN SHE WAS
GROWING UP.
>> YOU LOSE YOUR MOTHER AT
SIX AND A HALF.
AT ELEVEN YOUR UNCLE AND
AUNT, YOUR FAVORITE UNCLE
AND AUNT ARE SET OFF TO THE
GULAG AND EXECUTED.
AT 16 YOU FALL IN LOVE AS
ONLY A 16-YEAR-OLD CAN, A
MAN AND YOUR FATHER SENDS
HIM TO THE GULAG, THESE
STORIES CONTINUED.
ONE DISASTER AFTER ANOTHER
AND YET SHE SURVIVED.
SHE FOUND THE UNIVERSAL
RESOURCES TO SURVIVE.
THAT WAS VERY IMPRESSIVE.
>> Woodruff: CHRIS, YOU WERE
THE CHILD OF YOUR MOTHER'S
MARRIAGE TO A MAN IN THE
UNITED STATES, THIS IS AFTER
SHE HAD GROWN-UP IN WHAT WAS
THEN THE SOVIET UNION,
DEFECTED TO THE U.S.
WHY DO YOU THINK SHE WAS
ABLE TO MAKE SOMETHING OF
HER LIFE AFTER THE JUST
UNSPEAKABLE THINGS SHE SAW
AND KNEW AS A CHILD?
>> YOU JUST KEEP GOING, KEEP
GOING, DRIVING, STAND MA AND
FALLING APART OCCASIONALLY
AND PICKING YOURSELF BACK UP
AND DUSTING YOURSELF OFF AND
MOVING FORWARD.
ADAPTABILITY.
ADAPTING TO CHANGE.
AND SHE WAS AN INCREDIBLE
NOMAD, RATHER THAN RUN AWAY
FROM THINGS, SHE WAS ABLE TO
RUN TO THINGS, TO TRY TO
START OVER FRESH.
>> Woodruff: ROSEMARY
SULLIVAN, HOW DO YOU EXPLAIN
THE NOMAD PART OF HER LIFE?
>> SHE GOT TO THE POINT OF
HAVING NO INVESTMENT IN
THINGS.
SHE BELIEVED IN THE BUDDHIST
PRINCIPLES OF BEING TIED
DOWN BY THINGS SO LET'S A
BEEN DONE THEM.
AN EACH TIME SHE THOUGHT SHE
COULD FIND ACTUALLY I THINK
ALMOST A SPIRITUALITY, A
STILL PEACEFUL PLACE.
AND SHE KEPT LEAVING THEM
AND KEPT LOOKING FOR IT.
IN THE MORALLY AMBIGUOUS
UNIVERSE SHES WITH BORN INTO,
STALIN'S WORLD, SHE DID HAVE
HER MARY POPPINS NANNY.
SHE HAD THE MOST WONDERFUL
NANNY WHOM SHE LOVED.
WHEN HER NANNY DIED SHE SAID
THE PERSON WHO LOVED ME
UNCONDITIONALLY IS NOW DONE
FROM MY LIFE.
AND THAT NANNY'S LOVE,
INTENSITY CREATED A KIND OF
MORAL CENTER I THINK FOR
HER.
THAT CHANGED HER AND MADE IT
POSSIBLE TO BE THE PERSON
SHE WAS.
>> CHRIS EVANS, HOW MUCH WAS
YOUR MOTHER'S PAST A PART OF
YOUR RELATIONSHIP WITH HER?
AND WHAT KIND OF
RELATIONSHIP DID YOU HAVE
WITH HER.
>> IT WASN'T A PART OF MY
PAST AT ALL UNTIL I WAS A
YOUNG TEENAGER.
BECAUSE SHE KEPT ME VERY,
VERY SHELTERED FROM IT.
SHE ALWAYS CALLED ME
AMERICAN AS APPLE PIE.
SHE WANTED ME-- SHE ALWAYS
WANTED TO PROTECT ME FROM
THE HARDSHIPS THAT SHE HAD
HAD TO GO THROUGH.
WE HAD A VERY SPECIAL
RELATIONSHIP, ONCE I HAD
BECOME PROBABLY A YOUNG
TEENAGER.
SOMETIMES I WAS DOING THE
PARENTING, SOMETIMES SHE
WASMENT WE WERE A LITTLE BIT
MORE OF AN EQUAL PARTNERSHIP,
SORT OF A SUPERDUO.
>> Woodruff: THAT REALLY
COMES THROUGH IN THE BOOK.
YOU HAD TO HAVE BEEN STRUCK
BY THAT, ROSEMARY.
>> YES, ABSOLUTELY I
REMEMBER SITTING IN, WHEN I
ADVISED-- VISITED CHRIS IN
PORTLAND SITTING IN MY HOLD
EL ROOM IN THE DESCENDING
DARK AND SAYING TO ME, THERE
WERE MOMENTS WHEN MY MOTHER
COULD FALL INTO THE NIGHT
TERRORS OF A CHILD.
AND YOU WOULDN'T KNOW WHAT
PRECIPITATED IT.
AND THOSE WHO STAYED WITH
HER, THOSE WHO LOVED HER,
SAW THE VOLCANO AND ACCEPTED
THE VOLUME CANNY OWE AND I
THOUGHT YES, THAT IS THE
DYNAMIC BETWEEN MOTHER AN
CHILD.
SOMETIMES YOU TOOK CARE OF
HER AND SHE WAS CONSTANTLY
PROTECTING YOU, RIGHT UP TO
THE END.
>> UH-HUH.
>> Woodruff: ROSEMARY, WHAT
ELSE WOULD YOU HAVE LIKED TO
KNOW ABOUT HER AND HOW WHAT
HAPPENED TO HER SHAPED HER,
BUT THEN HOW SHE SURVIVED.
>> I WOULD HAVE ACTUALLY
LIKED PEOPLE TO HAVE BEEN
MORE GENEROUS.
THE IDEA THAT SHE WAS
STALIN'S DAUGHTER, PRECEDED
HER.
AN THERE WAS ALWAYS THIS
PROJECTION.
SO IT WAS NEVER POSSIBLE FOR
HER TO BE REALLY FREELY
HERSELF.
SHE WOULD CARRY THAT
PROJECTION.
AND IF SHE WAS ANGRY, THEY
WOULD SAY JUST LIKE HER
FATHER.
IF SHE WAS ANXIOUS,
SUPERSTITIOUS ABOUT
SOMETHING, FOR INSTANCE,
THINKING THAT PERHAPS THE
AGB WAS STILL INTERESTED IN
HER, PARANOID JUST LIKE HER
FATHER.
NORTH AMERICANS, THEY DON'T
UNDERSTAND WHAT THE
DEFECTION OF STALIN'S
DAUGHTER FROM THE SOVIET
UNION MEANT IT WOULD BE LIKE
PRESIDENT OBAMA'S DAUGHTER
GOING TO CHINA AND SAYING
I'M FED UP WITH THIS, YOU
KNOW, WITH UNITED STATES.
SO SHE CARRIED A WEIGHT FOR
THE SOVIET GOVERNMENT IN HER
DEFECTION THAT WAS NOT TO BE
FORGIVEN.
>> Woodruff: FINALLY, CHRIS,
WHAT PART OF YOUR MOTHER DO
YOU THINK IS MOST IN YOU?
>> SHE HAD INCREDIBLE FAITH.
AND I DID NOT REALLY DEVELOP
THAT SENSE OF FAITH UNTIL
AFTER SHE PASSED AWAY.
AND THE SENSE OF HER BEING
WITH ME.
I HAVE A SENSE OF
ACCOMPLISHMENT THAT I DIDN'T
HAVE BEFORE THAT I KNOW THAT
SHE LEFT WITH ME.
SHE WAS ALWAYS PROUD OF ME,
WHEN I HADN'T EVEN REALLY
ACCOMPLISHED ANYTHING.
THE UNCONDITIONAL LOVE WHICH
I HAVEN'T FELT FROM ANYBODY
ELSE, EVER, BECAUSE SHE WAS
MY MOTHER.
AND THAT WARMENT OF
FRIENDSHIP WHICH I PROBABLY
WILL LOOK FOR FOR THE REST
OF MY LIFE IN OTHER PEOPLE.
BUT I KNOW THAT IT'S
POSSIBLE.
>> WELL, SO MUCH COMES
THROUGH T IS A REMARKABLE
BOOK.
STALIN'S DAUGHTER, THE
EXTRAORDINARY AND TUMULTUOUS
LIFE OF SVETLANA ALLILUYEVA.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: ON THE NEWSHOUR
ONLINE, IS IT APPROPRIATE FOR A
CHILD TO WEAR A BIKINI?
PARENTING BLOGGER WENDY THOMAS
RUSSELL STRUGGLED WITH AN ANSWER
TO THIS AFTER HER OWN NINE-YEAR-
OLD DAUGHTER FELL IN LOVE WITH A
TWO PIECE.
READ HER ESSAY, AND WEIGH IN ON
THE TOPIC, ON OUR HOMEPAGE.
ALL THAT AND MORE IS ON OUR WEB
SITE, pbs.org/newshour.
TONIGHT ON CHARLIE ROSE,
GENERAL ELECTRIC C.E.O. JEFF
IMMELT ON THE NEED FOR GLOBAL
TRADE.
ON TUESDAY, WE'LL LOOK AT NEW
SOLUTIONS TO TACKLE THE BIG
PROBLEM OF WASTED FOOD,
PERFECTLY GOOD FOOD THAT NEVER
MAKES IT TO YOUR TABLE SIMPLY
BECAUSE IT JUST DOESN'T LOOK
PERFECT.
IT'S A COLLABORATION WITH OUR
COLLEAGUES AT NPR, WHO WILL HAVE
A RELATED STORY ON "MORNING
EDITION" TOMORROW.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
WE'LL SEE YOU ONLINE, AND AGAIN
HERE TOMORROW EVENING.
FOR ALL OF US HERE AT THE PBS
NEWSHOUR, THANK YOU AND GOOD
NIGHT.